Dear fellow practitioners, in the practice of cultivation, conflicts
are unavoidable.
However,
these conflicts also bring us
many benefits. When
we resolve these conflicts,
firstly,
we understand each other better—that is the ultimate goal. Secondly, in resolving conflicts,
we learn
better ways of behaving and
apply those better ways of behaving.
That is, we are following a
process of spiritual elevation. Do you
agree?
When we resolve conflicts,
we maintain the awareness of
seeking to understand the
issue—that is a very good thing.
And with all the civilization
of humanity, we must go through the process of learning from experience.
Learning from experience is essential; to learn, one cannot do without learning from experience, and to become
skilled, one cannot do without the
process of inquiry. Do you agree?
We ourselves are conflicted within
our hearts,
so we must seek understanding to
resolve this conflict. There are so many
conflicts within us, dear fellow
practitioners. We are very
dissatisfied with ourselves. Do you agree, dear fellow
practitioners? It's a great
contradiction. Let me give you
an example: We
love our wives/husbands very much, but sometimes
we don't dare say it, so we act differently. Is
n't that a conflict within our hearts? Then there are things we do that we
cherish for
our friends, colleagues,
relatives, and acquaintances. We value them very much,
but we are very hesitant and
hindered when we speak out. When we do speak,
we say something different from what's in
our hearts. Dear fellow practitioners, has anyone experienced
this? Have you ever experienced this? Let's
see if anyone has. Yes, yes. And in
life, we encounter
many internal conflicts, and
we must be very strong.
We can only resolve that
conflict if, for example, we cherish someone, and we have to
agonize over it many times, and many times
we are told things that contradict
our true feelings. Finally, after a process of
self-reflection within ourselves, we
can practice the principle of
inner and outer unity, without
conflict. But to reach
that point, some people struggle, some are
determined and succeed, while others simply
cannot do it, even if they live their lives in despair. Isn't that right,
dear fellow practitioners?
In this life, there are people who
cannot resolve
their own internal conflicts.
Therefore,
resolving conflicts is a
very good thing; it leads
us to listening, understanding, and the
strength to
overcome all the
conflicts within our hearts.
When we have the spirit to
fight against these conflicts, we
will gradually become true human beings, and
then we will uphold the precepts.  One
easy way is that the precept of speaking the truth and not
lying—to uphold that precept,
we must fight against
our own conflicting minds,
right? So the root of it is the
conflicting mind. As for the conflicting mind, it can change the
object: self-contradiction,
self-contradiction with
others. And then there's the higher level of conflict, which is related
to knowledge and practice; that also falls under the category of
conflict. The conflict between one
's own understanding, the understanding of others, and between
oneself—their knowledge and practice are
also part of that. Therefore,
when one wants to attain enlightenment and achieve the state of perfect enlightenment, one
must completely eliminate all doubt, that
is, doubtful thoughts. To
eliminate doubtful thoughts, we must go through many conflicting thoughts.
Resolving these conflicts
is something everyone has to do; it's impossible not to.
But if a person is wise, they
will resolve conflicts according to truth and virtue.
Those who are unwise,
ignorant, and foolish will resolve
these conflicts based on their own nature.  Do you
understand that
we should eliminate the ego? Then, how do we choose to
resolve conflicts?
We must eliminate two things: first, the
ego, and second, the unwholesome actions. So, to
resolve conflicts by eliminating the
ego, what must we do?
We must
listen, listen to many perspectives on a
problem, dear fellow practitioners. Listen from
many angles. Sometimes,
we must examine and experience what
listening is like. Sometimes we listen with our
ears, sometimes we must listen with all six senses—
eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind—
if we need to use all six senses to
examine a problem, we must use them all. Before
we decide, there are conflict resolution methods that
we must use to
eliminate the ego. Eliminating the ego is
like that, dear fellow practitioners. We must use all six senses to resolve a
conflict; only then can we resolve a problem. Only then will
we avoid making mistakes. Do you
understand clearly? Otherwise, if we
don't use all our senses, we won't...  If we don't use
appropriate methods to resolve conflicts,
we easily make mistakes
because our ego is very large and
our ignorance is very
deep. If we don't know the
method, if we don't persevere and diligently examine
a problem, we are very easily
led into mistakes.
Secondly, resolving conflicts with unwholesome
methods shows true ignorance. Those who are truly ignorant
act according to emotions and ego. Emotions and
ego are not at fault; calmly acting according to
personal opinions means this person is far from the
path and cannot approach it.
Therefore, we see that
conflict is very normal for ourselves and
for others. So,
let's look at conflict
and how to resolve it with a
normal perspective. Do you understand?
Nothing seems to be blown out of proportion.
When there is no conflict, it's
normal; when there is a conflict, we should use a
normal mindset to resolve
it.  Okay, let's not add
anger and malice to the
conflict resolution process. We shouldn't do it this way.
There are three things: giving up,
disagreeing with something, and then
giving up. That's the attitude of
anger, leading to giving up.
Therefore, we don't listen, we don't examine
a problem thoroughly and
deeply, and that's our disadvantage.
And when we already have a
mind of giving up, we can never
understand a problem very deeply
because we're easily swayed by our ego. We give up, we don't follow through on the
matter,
we don't listen, we don't
absorb many opinions, we don't analyze, we lack the
concentration to analyze, we
lack the calmness to analyze. So,
for those who are experiencing
internal or external conflicts, the
first thing we need to eliminate
is the attitude of giving up.
Do you understand? The attitude of giving up on
conflict is an attitude that should never be
present.  We can only use the method of letting go to
abandon a problem. Letting go means having
clear understanding, that is,
we have clearly understood that problem
and we practice the mind of non-attachment. That's all.
Not clinging. That means that when
we clearly understand, we become enlightened, and
enlightenment naturally leads to letting go, my dear fellow practitioners.
As for any problem that we haven't yet understood, we
must seek to understand it until we become enlightened, right, my
dear practitioners? Therefore, we
don't abandon any contradiction
in our minds or external circumstances
through the attitude of letting go, because the attitude of letting go
is anger, it belongs to the manifested form
of the initial mind. And so, if we
carry this angry mind to another place,
naturally we will still have
our unwholesome words
about that matter remaining.
Then, when we carry this angry mind,
the anger becomes the dominant force, leading
us to various places. If there
is a cause, we will bring
this contradiction out and eliminate it because it
is anger, and anger has the nature
of harm and conflict.  That's how dangerous it is,
dear fellow practitioners. Therefore, we should
n't give up on any issue until
we are completely enlightened and let go.
There are people who spend their whole lives harboring resentment over
something, so they
abandon that conflict and resentment throughout their
lives. No matter what they do, they
will always bring up that
conflicting thing they abandoned. They constantly
mention it, and thus
they maintain the mind of anger and resentment
without ever letting go. So
we must see the danger of this,
as taught in the Dhammapada by the Buddha. Mind
leads all things. When we allow our minds and
hearts to remain unenlightened and unliberated
from a problem, we are still
entangled in it, and we
must find a way to resolve it,
otherwise it will control our whole lives.
Mindfulness and Contemplation: For example, if
someone harms you in some way, and
you haven't yet become enlightened, you
distance yourself from that person and stop talking to them. Then,
when the opportunity arises...  I told
that girl back then that I wouldn't bother
arguing with her. Did she recount the events and
say she wouldn't argue? Yes, Dai
Huu did. No, I didn't say that,
but if I have the chance, I'll bring it up again.
She said she wouldn't argue,
but actually, when she told the story, her mind was
n't joyful at that moment. It was a fleeting moment. Only Buddhas and saints, when they recount such stories for the benefit of the masses, when their minds are calm,
can tell the story without
anger or resentment, and they can tell it purely. But if our minds haven't awakened, if our minds are still attached, and we recount that conflicting story, we're just recounting it with an impure mind,
right, dear fellow practitioners? An impure mind is immediately
followed by harm, dear fellow
practitioners, right?
That's the conflict. Therefore, remember that when
we have meetings in the
club to resolve conflicts,
we need to
listen to the whole
issue and resolve it completely.  In this system,
we can resolve
these issues very easily, so
we must understand them thoroughly.
We need to cultivate this habit, which is very
beneficial. This habit will allow us to
follow the example of Shakyamuni Buddha in future lives when we study Buddhist teachings.
We must have the
quality of self-reliance, meaning we
must think for ourselves to achieve enlightenment. To prove this to you, dear fellow
practitioners, resolving contradictions
is like this, and we must resolve
those contradictions until the day we become Buddhas.
For example, the Buddha, in
the days leading up to his
49-day meditation practice, also had to
resolve contradictions. Before,
when he was young, he reached the first,
second, third, and fourth stages of meditation.
Now, he is practicing with other teachers
and practicing asceticism in the physical body.
What does this mean? Isn't that a
balance? Isn't that a contradiction? Is
n't that a contradiction
between one practice and
another? Oh, then what about that?
And finally, from this
balanced, two-sided thinking, we
will find the ultimate path.
His path is the Middle Way,
so the task of resolving
internal conflicts is our task
until the day we become saints. Once we become saints, there will be
no
internal conflict and no external conflict
anymore. That's right, dear fellow practitioners. Therefore,
we rejoice when conflicts arise, and
we are ready to handle them without
hesitation.
The mind of the Bodhisattva is the same. If we have a
conflict, we must always go to the very
end. The Bodhisattva's practice has a habit of
receiving opinions, but also thinking about them and
finding everything that can be related to
this matter. We investigate, think
deeply, and only then
decide. That is a
very good and beneficial habit.
And because of that, we are
not afraid when we make mistakes and people point them out.
We are not afraid, we do not
feel anger, right, fellow practitioners? No anger,
no malice, because we still
need to perfect ourselves. And if we
have already understood...  Then, from a big problem, we will
think and realize it, and then it will
become a small problem. Do you understand?
[Music]